---
layout: post
title: Ruby De-Railed
---
An early challenge in my apprenticeship at 8th Light is going to be weaning myself off of Rails and becoming more comfortable working in pure Ruby.

In his review of version 1 of my Tic-Tac-Toe app, craftsman Josh Cheek made a comment that surprised me: "Design sense follows what is common in Rails, which I think is problematic, and probably most here would agree with me (though not necessarily in the preferred alternatives)." This caught me quite off guard, as one of the things I was most proud of in the app was my adherence to recommended Rails principles and practices. However, as I paired with my mentor Rylan yesterday at Waza (8th Light's weekly work-on-whatever sessions on Friday afternoons), I started to see how beneficial working in pure Ruby will be.

A popular phrase in Rails is "convention over configuration," referring to the idea that a large portion of web applications (80%? Pareto, anyone?) work pretty much the same way under the hood, and the remaining, smaller percentage of the app is what distinguishes it from everything else. This is a clever thought and was certainly helpful for me as a beginner (TSL recognized the need for new developers to see *something* up on the page--that early satisfaction creates a hunger for more). However, it's also dangerous because it allows me to take things for granted and rely on "automagic" methods and processes without understanding how they actually work.

I must keep in mind that Rails is only a *framework* for web applications written with Ruby. As such, Rails is going to have biases (both subtle and explicit) towards certain ways of doing things. I don't hold that against Rails--any framework will inevitably have biases, and in fact I believe there's value in it being opinionated and encouraging a particular approach over others. But as I pursue mastery in software development, I need to understand the tools available to me and be able to select the right tool for the job.